[docs] Reactive UI guide (#138)
moodle/devdocs: docs/guides/javascript/reactive/index.md

---

> title: Creating a reactive UI

Reviewer: Would be good to add some tags here.

Author: Done.

### Initialize a component from a mustache template

Components are easy to embed in mustache files. To do so your class must have a static "init" method that could be called inside the {{#JS}}.

<Tabs>
  <TabItem value="component-view" label="Component class" default>

```js title="path/to/plugin/amd/src/childcomponent.js"
import {BaseComponent} from 'core/reactive';
import {reactiveInstance} from 'YOUR_PLUGIN/reactive';

export default class extends BaseComponent {
    static init(target, selectors) {
        return new Component({
            element: document.getElementById(target),
            reactive: reactiveInstance,
            selectors,
        });
    }
    // (...)
}
```

  </TabItem>
  <TabItem value="mustache-view" label="Mustache file">

```handlebars title="path/to/plugin/templates/yourthing/childcomponent.mustache"
<div id="{{uniqid}}-your-plugin-{{id}}"> (...) </div>
{{#js}}
require(['YOUR_PLUGIN/local/yourthing/childcomponent'], function(component) {
    component.init('{{uniqid}}-your-plugin-{{id}}');
});
{{/js}}
```

> 

Reviewer: It might be worth adding a tip admonitino to expalin the use of uniqid here.

```suggestion

:::tip Generating unique id attributes

You can use the `{{uniqid}}` Mustache helper within your code to help you generate a unique id for your HTML attributes and target them in your React component.

Please note that the `{{uniqid}}` helper generates a single value each time it is rendered, and you will need to combine it with other data to create a truly unique value. In this example the name of the plugin, and a static element `id` is used to generate a unique value.

:::

```

  </TabItem>
</Tabs>

> The init method has an id as a first param to find the main DOM Element, but it also has a second one called `selectors`. This second param is an optional (but recommended) param any component can use. We will see how to use the selectors later but they are CSS selectors to find inner DOM elements in the main element. Bypassing as an init-param, any mustache can customize the default CSS selectors, which means the component is more reusable.

Reviewer: I'd also put this into an `::: info` admonition. It is relevant, but will be discussed in more detail later on. This mention is just a "Heads-up" to let you the reader know that it will be covered in more detail later so hold that quesiton til then.

Author: Done.

### The Component lifecycle hooks

All components are registered in a Reactive Instance and, when this is done, the Component can start watching the state and ask for state mutations. However, during its life, a Component can operate differently if necessary.

To understand how a component works you need to understand the component lifecycle and its hook methods:

![Component lifecycle hooks](./_files/lifecycle_hooks.svg)

<Tabs>
  <TabItem value="create" label="create" default>

> Before the component is registered into the Reactive Instance. This method is used to define the main component attributes. At this moment the Component cannot interact with the Reactive Instance yet.

Reviewer: The first sentence is not a complete sentence. Either turn it into one, or make it a piece of structured data, for example:

```suggestion
Called: Before the component is registered to the Reactive Instance.

This method is used to define the main component attributes. The Component cannot interact with the Reactive Instance yet as instantiation has not yet completed.
```

The above makes it clear where it is called in the lifecycle, and also adds a brief explanation as to why it cannot interact yet.

#### The `create(descriptor)` hook

> The BaserComponent construct method will register the component in the Reactive Instance after some validations. However, it is quite common for components to have private attributes needed for the UI logic. Components can set their own attributes in the `create` hook method.

Reviewer: Typo: `BaserComponent`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `BaseComponent` construct method will register the component in the Reactive Instance after some validation. It is quite common for components to have private attributes needed for the UI logic. Components can set their own attributes in the `create` hook method.
```

    // in "descriptor.element".
    this.id = this.element.dataset.id;

    (... any other data extracted from the "descriptor"...)
}
```

  </div>
</details>

:::note

When create is called the component has an `element` attribute because it should read data from the main element but it does not have a `this.reactive` attribute because the component can be registered before having a fully functional Reactive Instance. Any initialization that requires a reactive instance or a state should be done in later hooks like stateReady or getWatchers.

:::

  </TabItem>
  <TabItem value="getWatchers" label="getWatchers">

At the moment the Reactive Instance is registering the component and asking it what parts of the state it is watching. This method returns a list of state changes the component is watching and the methods that will handle those changes, something like an event listener for state changes.

#### The `getWatchers(): array` hook

This hook is called when the Reactive Instance is registering the component. At this moment the component can specify which state changes are watching and what methods will use to listen to those changes.

> The method should return an array of objects containing:
> watch: the state changes to watch. For example `user.username:update`
> handler: the class method to handle the state change event. For example `this._refreshUsername`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The method should return an array of objects containing, with each object containing:

- watch: the state changes to watch. For example `user.username:update`
- handler: the class method to handle the state change event. For example `this._refreshUsername`.
```

<details>
  <summary>View examples</summary>
  <div>

This is a real example of getWatchers from a course index module:

```js
getWatchers() {
    return [
        {watch: `cm:created`, handler: this._createCm},
        {watch: `cm:deleted`, handler: this._deleteCm},
        {watch: `section:created`, handler: this._createSection},
        {watch: `section:deleted`, handler: this._deleteSection},
    ];
}
```

In case the component only watches changes in a specific element of a state collection, the function could be something like.

```js
getWatchers() {

>     const id = this.element.dataset.id;

Reviewer: It may be worth mentioning where the `this.element` is specified elsewhere in the code and how it comes to be here.

Author: done.

    return [
        {watch: `cm[${id}]:created`, handler: this._createCm},
        {watch: `cm[${id}]:deleted`, handler: this._deleteCm},
        {watch: `section[${id}]:created`, handler: this._createSection},
        {watch: `section[${id}]:deleted`, handler: this._deleteSection},
    ];
}
```

  </div>
</details>

:::note

> 

Reviewer: Maybe add a first para like:

```suggestion

No need to manually `bind` or use the `call` function!

```

  </TabItem>
  <TabItem value="stateReady" label="stateReady">

When the reactive instance has the initial state loaded. Is important to note that this method will be called even if the component is registered after the initial state is loaded. For all purposes, this method is the equivalent of a page ready for components.

#### The `stateReady(state)` hook

The Reactive Instance will call this hook on the registered components when the state data is initially loaded. This is one of the most important hooks in the Component lifecycle. At this moment the component will get its state and it can ensure that the Reactive Instance is ready and its watchers are working.

Even if the component is registered once the initial state is loaded, the Reactive Instance will trigger that method when the Component is fully registered and the page is ready. For all purposes, this method is the equivalent of a page-ready event for components.

The typical actions for a stateReady are:
Add event listeners to capture user interactions.
Refresh parts of the main element using the state data.
Delegate logic to subcomponents.

> Go to the section [BaseComponent helpers](#basecomponent-helpers) to learn about some useful methods for simplifying the stateReady code.

Reviewer: We tend to use "See the " rather than "Go to the", however since this is a _future_ topic it may be btter to say "The `BaseComponent` helpers section will discuss this in more detail." or similar.

Author: I like it. Fixed.

  </TabItem>
  <TabItem value="destroy" label="destroy">

> Before the component is unregistered. After this method is called the Component will no longer watch the state or capture the user interactions, even if the component's main DOM element is still present on the page.

Reviewer: Again, suggest key/value pairing of "Called: Before the ..."

Author: Done.

- The returned fields have some information that is only for the mutation, like adding some small chunk of HTML or some pre-loaded strings that do not need to be in the state all the time.
- Some of the state attributes are calculated in the front end using the provided element fields.
- Some element attributes have default values that the backend can omit to optimize the returned message size.

For those scenarios, there's a reserved action called `prepareFields`. The state manager will use this method to convert the fields provided to valid state objects.

The prepareFields method will return get the following parameters:

1. The `StateManager` object to access the full state
2. The state element name `elementName`
3. An object with the `fields` provided

<details>
  <summary>View example</summary>
  <div>

A possible prepareFields update type:

```js
prepareFields(stateManager, updateName, fields) {
    const state = stateManager.state;
    fields.extras = state.activity.extras && fields.extras;
    return fields;
}
```

  </div>
</details>

> ## Drag&drop helper component

Reviewer: Suggest spaces here:

```suggestion
## Drag & drop helper component
```
